README.md, before:

# redcliff-s-hypothesizing-dynamic-causal-graphs <br/><br/> :wavy_dash::curly_loop::cyclone::loop::bulb::pencil:
Code corresponding to ICML 2025 paper "Generating Hypotheses of Dynamic Causal Graphs in Neuroscience: Leveraging Generative Factor Models of Observed Time Series"

We ask that any derivative works which draw significantly from this project please cite our work as: 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```

**_References_** (APA format): 
 - [1] O.G. REDCLIFF-S PAPER 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```
 - [2] Weichwald, S., Jakobsen, M. E., Mogensen, P. B., Petersen, L., Thams, N., & Varando, G. (2020, August). Causal structure learning from time series: Large regression coefficients may predict causal links better in practice than small p-values. In NeurIPS 2019 Competition and Demonstration Track (pp. 27-36). PMLR.
 - [3] Mague, S. D., Talbot, A., Blount, C., Walder-Christensen, K. K., Duffney, L. J., Adamson, E., ... & Dzirasa, K. (2022). Brain-wide electrical dynamics encode individual appetitive social behavior. Neuron, 110(10), 1728-1741.

**_README Overview_**: 
 - Repository Overview: describes the contents and naming convention(s) of the repository
 - Environment Setup: describes how to install dependencies and set up a local system to use the repo
 - Dataset Curration and Preparation: describes how to prepare the data used for experiments in [1]
 - Model Training: describes how to train models used in [1]
 - Evaluation and Results Analysis: describes how to analyze results and reconstruct findings reported in [1]

---
## Repository Overview :sunrise_over_mountains:

**_Modules_**:
 - data: contains scripts, functions, and class definitions for handling data used in [1]
 - evaluate: contains scripts and functions used to obtain results reported in [1]
 - models: contains class definitions for each algorithm/method used in [1]
 - general_utils: contains general purpose functions used to support modules in the repo
 - tidybench: a locally adapted copy of the original tidybench repository [2]
 - train: contains scripts for training algorithms/baselines described in [1]


**_Naming Conventions_**:
 - Data Scripts: files which end in "\_datasets.py" contain class definitions for DataSet and DataLoader objects, while all other files are used for currating and/or organizing (esp. "clean\_\*" named scripts) data files
 - Training Scripts: generally formatted as "algName_datasetName_uniqueScriptIdentifier", along with either ".py" for the actual python script or "\_cached_args.txt" to denote a file that contains the hyperparameters for the script
 - Evlauation Scripts: generally formatted as "evaluationType_datasetName_uniqueEvaluationIdentifier", along with either ".py" for the actual python script or "\_cached_args.txt" to denote a file that contains the hyperparameters for the script
    * Note that scripts for evaluating grid searches over hyperparameters break this convention, instead being named as "eval_gs_" followed by "algorithmName_datasetNameUsedInGridSearch_uniqueSearchIdentifier"

---
## Environment Setup :wrench::hammer:

To set up your local system(s) for running _most_ of the code in this repository (e.g. training algorithms defined in the 'models' module and most evaluations), complete the following steps:
 1) Set up Anaconda on your system(s)
 2) Create a new conda environment via ```conda env create --yourRedcliffEnvironment --file=redcliff-s-icml2025.yml```
 3) Activate the new conda environment via ```conda activate yourRedcliffEnvironment```
 4) Set up your local file structure. The repository assumes you have the following folders in your system - you may change them as needed, but this will require editing numerous scripts (esp. any ending in "\_cached_args.txt" that you wish to run):
    * 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```
If you intend on running comparisons between REDCLIFF-S and the supervised causal discovery algorithms from Table 2 [1], then run the preceding steps, but substitute the command in Step 2 with ```conda env create --yourRedcliffEnvironment --file=redcliff-s-icml2025-eval-env.yml```. Please note that we suggest only doing this if necessary, as the dependencies in redcliff-s-icml2025-eval-env.yml are primarily installed via pip, whereas redcliff-s-icml2025.yml places far more emphasis on conda installations.

---
## Dataset Curration and Preparation :open_file_folder:

In this section we lay out the steps for downloading/generating and preparing data files for use in this repository.

**_Synthetic Systems Datasets_**:
 1) currate the dataset(s) by running ```cd data | python3 currate_sVARwInnovativeContinuousGaussianNoise_data_etNL.py```
 2) 'clean'/organize the dataset(s) by running ```cd data | python3 clean_sVARwInnovativeContinuousGaussianNoise_data_etNL.py```
 3) re-organize data into format for supervised causal discovery task (see Table 2 of [1]) by running ```cd data | python3 aggregate_synthetic_systems_datasets.py```
 4) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/synthetic_datasets.py

**_D4IC Dataset(s)_**:
 1) Downlaod the original Dream4 Challenge Dataset from <https://www.synapse.org/Portal/filehandle?ownerId=syn3049712&ownerType=ENTITY&fileName=DREAM4_InSilico_Size10.zip&preview=false&wikiId=74630>, and extract contents into ```/datasets/dream4/preprocessed/size10_individual_noStateLabels```
 2) Run ```cd data | python3 dream4.py``` to preprocess original Dream4 Challenge data prior to D4IC data curration
 3) Run ```cd data | python3 dream4_insilicoCombo.py``` to currate the D4IC dataset(s)
 4) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/dream4_datasets.py

**_TST-100Hz Dataset(s)_**:
 1) Download the original Tail Suspension Test (TST) Dataset from <https://research.repository.duke.edu/concern/datasets/zc77sr31x?locale=en>, and extract contents into ```/public_TST_data/original_format```
 2) Run ```cd data | python3 tst_100HzLP.py``` to preprocess the TST dataset
 3) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/local_field_potential_datasets.py

**_Social Preference-100Hz Dataset(s)_**:
 1) As directed in the original paper [3], obtain the original Social Preference (SP) Dataset by reaching out to the lead contact, Kafui Dzirasa (kafui.dzirasa@duke.edu)
 2) Run ```cd data | python3 socialPreference_100HzLP.py``` to preprocess the SP dataset
 3) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/local_field_potential_datasets.py

---
## Model Training :steam_locomotive::railway_car::railway_car: 

How to train various models and search hyperparameters 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```

---
## Evaluation and Results Analysis :bar_chart::chart_with_downwards_trend::chart_with_upwards_trend:

How to run analyses to evaluate models and perform experiments from original paper 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```

Commit message:

instructions for training algorithms added

README.md, after:

# redcliff-s-hypothesizing-dynamic-causal-graphs <br/><br/> :wavy_dash::curly_loop::cyclone::loop::bulb::pencil:
Code corresponding to ICML 2025 paper "Generating Hypotheses of Dynamic Causal Graphs in Neuroscience: Leveraging Generative Factor Models of Observed Time Series"

We ask that any derivative works which draw significantly from this project please cite our work as: 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```

**_References_** (APA format): 
 - [1] O.G. REDCLIFF-S PAPER 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```
 - [2] Weichwald, S., Jakobsen, M. E., Mogensen, P. B., Petersen, L., Thams, N., & Varando, G. (2020, August). Causal structure learning from time series: Large regression coefficients may predict causal links better in practice than small p-values. In NeurIPS 2019 Competition and Demonstration Track (pp. 27-36). PMLR.
 - [3] Mague, S. D., Talbot, A., Blount, C., Walder-Christensen, K. K., Duffney, L. J., Adamson, E., ... & Dzirasa, K. (2022). Brain-wide electrical dynamics encode individual appetitive social behavior. Neuron, 110(10), 1728-1741.

**_README Overview_**: 
 - Repository Overview: describes the contents and naming convention(s) of the repository
 - Environment Setup: describes how to install dependencies and set up a local system to use the repo
 - Dataset Curration and Preparation: describes how to prepare the data used for experiments in [1]
 - Model Training: describes how to train models used in [1]
 - Evaluation and Results Analysis: describes how to analyze results and reconstruct findings reported in [1]

---
## Repository Overview :sunrise_over_mountains:

**_Modules_**:
 - data: contains scripts, functions, and class definitions for handling data used in [1]
 - evaluate: contains scripts and functions used to obtain results reported in [1]
 - models: contains class definitions for each algorithm/method used in [1]
 - general_utils: contains general purpose functions used to support modules in the repo
 - tidybench: a locally adapted copy of the original tidybench repository [2]
 - train: contains scripts for training algorithms/baselines described in [1]


**_Naming Conventions_**:
 - Data Scripts: files which end in "\_datasets.py" contain class definitions for DataSet and DataLoader objects, while all other files are used for currating and/or organizing (esp. "clean\_\*" named scripts) data files
 - Training Scripts: generally formatted as "algName_datasetName_uniqueScriptIdentifier", along with either ".py" for the actual python script or "\_cached_args.txt" to denote a file that contains the hyperparameters for the script
 - Evlauation Scripts: generally formatted as "evaluationType_datasetName_uniqueEvaluationIdentifier", along with either ".py" for the actual python script or "\_cached_args.txt" to denote a file that contains the hyperparameters for the script
    * Note that scripts for evaluating grid searches over hyperparameters break this convention, instead being named as "eval_gs_" followed by "algorithmName_datasetNameUsedInGridSearch_uniqueSearchIdentifier"

---
## Environment Setup :wrench::hammer:

To set up your local system(s) for running _most_ of the code in this repository (e.g. training algorithms defined in the 'models' module and most evaluations), complete the following steps:
 1) Set up Anaconda on your system(s)
 2) Create a new conda environment via ```conda env create --yourRedcliffEnvironment --file=redcliff-s-icml2025.yml```
 3) Activate the new conda environment via ```conda activate yourRedcliffEnvironment```
 4) Set up your local file structure. The repository assumes you have the following folders in your system - you may change them as needed, but this will require editing numerous scripts (esp. any ending in "\_cached_args.txt" that you wish to run):
    * 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```
If you intend on running comparisons between REDCLIFF-S and the supervised causal discovery algorithms from Table 2 [1], then run the preceding steps, but substitute the command in Step 2 with ```conda env create --yourRedcliffEnvironment --file=redcliff-s-icml2025-eval-env.yml```. Please note that we suggest only doing this if necessary, as the dependencies in redcliff-s-icml2025-eval-env.yml are primarily installed via pip, whereas redcliff-s-icml2025.yml places far more emphasis on conda installations.

---
## Dataset Curration and Preparation :open_file_folder:

In this section we lay out the steps for downloading/generating and preparing data files for use in this repository.

**_Synthetic Systems Datasets_**:
 1) currate the dataset(s) by running ```cd data | python3 currate_sVARwInnovativeContinuousGaussianNoise_data_etNL.py```
 2) 'clean'/organize the dataset(s) by running ```cd data | python3 clean_sVARwInnovativeContinuousGaussianNoise_data_etNL.py```
 3) re-organize data into format for supervised causal discovery task (see Table 2 of [1]) by running ```cd data | python3 aggregate_synthetic_systems_datasets.py```
 4) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/synthetic_datasets.py

**_D4IC Dataset(s)_**:
 1) Downlaod the original Dream4 Challenge Dataset from <https://www.synapse.org/Portal/filehandle?ownerId=syn3049712&ownerType=ENTITY&fileName=DREAM4_InSilico_Size10.zip&preview=false&wikiId=74630>, and extract contents into ```/datasets/dream4/preprocessed/size10_individual_noStateLabels```
 2) Run ```cd data | python3 dream4.py``` to preprocess original Dream4 Challenge data prior to D4IC data curration
 3) Run ```cd data | python3 dream4_insilicoCombo.py``` to currate the D4IC dataset(s)
 4) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/dream4_datasets.py

**_TST-100Hz Dataset(s)_**:
 1) Download the original Tail Suspension Test (TST) Dataset from <https://research.repository.duke.edu/concern/datasets/zc77sr31x?locale=en>, and extract contents into ```/public_TST_data/original_format```
 2) Run ```cd data | python3 tst_100HzLP.py``` to preprocess the TST dataset
 3) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/local_field_potential_datasets.py

**_Social Preference-100Hz Dataset(s)_**:
 1) As directed in the original paper [3], obtain the original Social Preference (SP) Dataset by reaching out to the lead contact, Kafui Dzirasa (kafui.dzirasa@duke.edu)
 2) Run ```cd data | python3 socialPreference_100HzLP.py``` to preprocess the SP dataset
 3) load/manage data with classes and functions from data/local_field_potential_datasets.py

---
## Model Training :steam_locomotive::railway_car::railway_car: 

The algorithms defined in the 'models' module can be trained via ```cd train | python3 algName_dataName_uniqueExperimentIdentifier.py``` (substituting in an actual script name from the 'train' module). To tune model hyperparameters, follow the pattern used in train/REDCLIFF_S_CMLP_tst100hzRerun1024AvgReg_gsSmooth1.py; the pattern can best be seen by running ```ctrl+F gen_lr``` in train/REDCLIFF_S_CMLP_tst100hzRerun1024AvgReg_gsSmooth1.py and seeing each reference to this particular hyperparameter throughout the file (similar references would need to be implemented for each hyperparameter you wish to tune in the training script for any algorithm from the 'models' module).

Note that the supervised causal discovery algorithms from Table 2 [1] were implemented later and thus do not follow the same training conventions as the algorithms in 'models'; to train these algorithms, see the instructions for running Table 2 evaluations in the next section of this README.

---
## Evaluation and Results Analysis :bar_chart::chart_with_downwards_trend::chart_with_upwards_trend:

How to run analyses to evaluate models and perform experiments from original paper 
```diff 
- ... (TO-DO: Update Information) ...
```
